With positive reinforcement, Ragdoll cats learn quickly and can pick up tricks as well as good behaviors such as using a scratching post. The Ragdoll cat is an all-around best buddy to just about everyone. They love their human families–even children–and will get along with other pets fairly well. Docile, sweet, and happy to relax for a good cuddle session, the loving Ragdoll will even greet their humans at the door when they come home. If you’re looking for a companion, you can’t find a much better choice than one of these easygoing felines.
Unlike many cats, Ragdolls are notable for collapsing into the arms of anyone who holds them, even if they are cradled on their back. They love their people, greeting them at the door, following them around the house, and leaping into a lap or snuggling in bed whenever given the chance. They often learn to come when called or to retrieve toys that are thrown for them.
The word most often used to describe them is docile, but that doesn’t mean they are inactive. They like to play with toys and enter into any family activities. With positive reinforcement in the form of praise and food rewards when they do something you like, Ragdolls learn quickly and can pick up tricks as well as good behaviors such as using a scratching post. In a small, sweet voice, they remind you of mealtime or ask for petting but are not excessively vocal.
Ragdolls have nice manners and are easy to live with. You will find a Ragdoll on your sofa or bed, but generally not much higher than that. He prefers to stay on the same level with his people rather than the highest point in a room.
A Ragdoll’s moderately long fur has little undercoat, which means it is less likely to mat and shed, but that doesn’t mean the cats need no grooming. Comb it twice a week with a stainless steel comb to remove dead hair that can cause tangles. Be sure to comb the fur on the legs thoroughly, especially where the leg meets the body, where mats are most likely to occur. A rubber curry brush will smooth the fur after you comb it and remove any remaining loose hairs. If you are gentle and don’t pull their hair, Ragdolls will love the attention they receive from you during grooming time.
Note that seasonal changes as well as hormonal fluctuations in unaltered cats can affect the length of the coat. The coat will be at its peak in winter. Ragdolls that have been spayed or neutered will usually have a lush coat year-round because they lack the hormonal fluctuations that occur in unaltered cats.