Guppies are peaceful fish that like to be kept in groups. They’re active swimmers and pretty much move around all the time. You’ll often see the males chasing the females trying to impress them by wiggling their fins. If your fish are constantly hiding, it could be an indication that they are stressed or ill.
Their natural habitat is in the warm freshwaters of South America, so it’s important to replicate these conditions into your tank to provide them with the most natural environment possible. As with any fish tank, you always need to make sure that the tank is set up correctly, and that the water is properly cycled. This ensures you have the appropriate bacteria’s which will convert harmful compounds into less harmful ones. Most people choose a ten gallon tank to keep Guppies in, but you can keep them in a 5 gallon, or anything upwards of a ten gallon. If you’re still unsure of which tank size you’d like – read our article on how to choose the right sized aquarium. You’ll need to use a heater to keep the water in between 75 to 82OF. Always place your heater at one end of the tank, and a thermometer at the other end to check that the water is heated through consistently. Whilst they can tolerate a wide range of waters, and of pH’s, from 5.5-8.5, the most ideal pH for them is between 7.0 and 7.2. As with the majority of fish, you’ll also need a filter – the type you choose will fall down to the size of your tank and your personal preference. A hang on back filter will be fine for most set ups. If you keep your fish in a large tank (bigger than 50 gallons) you might want to consider using an external canister filter.
The most common tank mates for a Guppy, is more Guppies! The majority of people who keep this fish do so because they like the vibrant colors of the males.  If you’re only keeping them for their looks, we recommend that you keep males only. You can keep one Guppy per 2 gallons of water; for example, you can keep 5 in a 10 gallon tank and 10 in a 20 gallon tank. If you choose to keep both males and females, keep them at a ratio of 2:1. They can also be kept with other peaceful community fish such as Mollies, Platies, Gouramis, Corydoras and peaceful tetras. Almost all livebearers such as ender’s livebearers and swordtails can make ideal tank mates for them too. You should avoid housing them with larger aggressive species, especially if they’re likely to make a meal of them. Keep them away from species such as Red Tailed Sharks, Barbs and aggressive Tetras. They will nip at their fins. If you want to keep them with other non-fish animals, you could house them with Ghost Shrimp or African Dwarf Frogs.
The food that fish eat depends on what’s available in their natural environment as well as their anatomy. Guppies are omnivores, which means they eat both plant and animal matter. They are not fussy eaters and will eat whatever you give them, including mosquito larvae. Their main diet should be good quality fish flakes. Ensure you choose a product which is high in protein, and not filler foods.  To ensure this, check the order of ingredients (ingredients are listed by weight). High quality foods will have proteins listed first (for example, other fish, shrimp, and meaty products). Avoid fish flakes which have fillers such as wheat and soy listed as the first few ingredients. To supplement the fish flakes you can feed your fish either live or frozen foods such as shrimp and bloodworms. You can also give them vegetables such as peas, lettuce and cucumber.