Miniature horses (commonly called "minis") are popular among equestrians and nonhorse people alike; their diminutive size, cute faces, and sweet dispositions have earned them fans around the world. Many owners of regular-sized horses also enjoy having these ponies around for their affectionate, easygoing companionship as well as for their novelty.
In general, minis that conform to standards possess the appearance of symmetry, strength, alertness, and agility that are demanded of larger horses. Judges in shows give preference to the smallest possible horse that's nearest to perfection in proportion, carriage, and grace. The forehead is wide, and the eyes are big and set far apart; the distance between them and the muzzle is relatively short. Large nostrils flank a refined muzzle. The ears are pointed and medium-size, with tips that angle inward a bit. The body is lean but muscular, giving the impression of strength and nimbleness. The mini carries itself with all the alertness and pride of even the largest of horses.
Most minis are too small to be ridden by anyone but the smallest child. Many owners drive their minis hitched to carts, wagons, or sleighs singly or in teams. Both the American Miniature Horse Association(AMHA) and American Miniature Horse Registry(AMHR) hold various shows throughout the year, as well as national competitions. Owners can exhibit their horses in show classes, including conformation contests in which the physical traits of the horses are evaluated. Driving, lead-line, costume, obstacle-running, jumping, and various games are among the many performance-oriented competitions in which minis participate. Many of these are similar to trials done with dogs. Minis are frequently used as companion animals to visit shut-ins, the elderly, the differently abled, and people who suffer from psychological issues. As guide animals, they assist the blind and hearing-impaired. There is some controversy as to whether these are suitable jobs for these animals; however, there is no denying their value as companion animals who provide comfort to their owners.
The Mini's small size makes it ideal for keeping on small acreages where there would be no room for a herd of large horses. Easily managed and requiring less food and care than their larger counterparts, the mini is a great horse for the novice owner. Like most ponies, minis are easier to overfeed than underfeed.