The American Quarter Horse is North America's most popular horse breed, also ranking among the oldest. With more than 5 million registered American Quarter Horses worldwide, the American Quarter Horse Association (AQHA) is the world's largest breed registry. The breed's popularity stems from its many positive attributes—among them, its gentle nature, versatility, beauty, speed, agility, and loyalty.
Quarter Horses are a mixture of Arabian, Spanish, and English-bred horses. Because their lineage includes a bit of draft horse, they are known as warmbloods (like Morgans and Canadians). Although the breed has existed since the 1600s, the American Quarter Horse Registry wasn't established until 1940.
These hardy horses are medium-boned, with finely chiseled heads, wide foreheads, and flat profiles. Their legs are sturdy without being coarse, and their shoulders and haunches are heavy and muscular. The infusion of Thoroughbred bloodlines has influenced the look and temperament of some Quarter Horses. Foundation Quarter Horses are bred to remain true to the original Quarter Horse type, which was used for cattle work on the open range.
This exceptionally versatile American Quarter Horse excels as a working, family, and show horse, equally comfortable on the trail and on the farm. They were once very popular as working cow horses because of their renowned "cow sense"; in modern times, their abilities shine in rodeo events such as reining, cutting, team ​penning, ​and speed games. Their powerful haunches help with quick departs to gather strays from herds of cattle, and propel them quickly yet deftly around the barrels in barrel races. Quarter Horse racing—more like sprints than the Thoroughbred races with which most people are familiar—remains an exhilarating sport with tracks across North America. Speeds of up to 55 miles per hour have been recorded during these short, intense Quarter Horse races. Whether under saddle or in the harness, their steady dispositions make them ideal beginner and family horses.
The compact, muscular silhouette of the foundation-type Quarter Horse is unmistakable. Its appearance exudes the strength and steadiness that makes it such a solid choice for so many situations. They're sure-footed and agile, even as they race at high speeds over short distances. Quarter Horses are especially known for their "cow sense"—a natural, instinctive skill in working with cows. This intuitive nature and underlying intelligence make them easy to train.