The loyal, congenial, versatile Morgan is among the most beloved breeds of horses. Known as "the breed that chooses you," it's an exceptionally beautiful breed with a proud carriage and a drive to please. Adaptable to virtually any situation and use, the Morgan is an easy horse to keep and enjoy.
The breed standard of the Morgan horse is very specific and outlines the ideal qualities of the breed. The head is refined and chiseled, with large, expressive eyes and a wide forehead. The ears are short and well shaped, usually carried upright. The face is straight or dished and short, the nostrils large, and the lips firm. The throatlatch — where the head and windpipe meet — is wider than that of other horses, allowing for free, easy respiration; overall, the neck appears upright and strong, gracefully blending into a body that is distinctively compact, suggesting sturdiness and agility. The chest is well-muscled, and the legs should be strong but refined. The Morgan carries its tail high and straight. Overall, the Morgan's compact but powerful body type gives an impression of strength, athleticism, and elegance, showcased by a notably proud, alert carriage.
Smaller than many other full-size horse breeds, Morgan horses average from 14.1 to 15.2 hands high. There is no strict standard regarding size, so horses may be shorter and taller. This hardy breed enjoys a lifespan longer than most; with proper care and in the absence of accidents, they easily live more than 30 years in good health.
The original Morgan horse was said to have been able to out-walk, trot, or pull any horse. Since its beginnings, the Morgan has been the ultimate all-purpose horse, with a long resume of abilities and applications. Before industrialization changed the landscape of agriculture and transportation, the Morgan was valued as much for plowing the fields as he was for pulling the family buggy to church in fine harness. Morgans were used as trotting horses on the race track and cavalry mounts in wartime. They were hitched or ridden by pioneers as they set out on on the trail to settle the American West. They've also been used as cow and pack horses. Today, Morgans can be found competing in almost every equestrian sport, from endurance riding to saddle seat show classes. Morgan horse shows often feature sidesaddle classes, trotting races under saddle, driving classes, dressage, jumping, and more, all showcasing the unique, outstanding versatility of the breed.
The Morgan's strong, compact body and refined, neat top line are distinctive, as is the regal, proud way with which it carries itself. Proud and alert, they carry their heads and tails high and elegantly. The most overarching quality of the Morgan, however, is its temperament. Typically very eager to please handlers, this is an animated breed, with what some equestrians describe as wit and humor. Morgans are courageous, strong, and spunky, but they are well known for their loyalty and affection.